A game of solitaire, a case of insomnia, a chance meeting at a train station, and a penchant for gambling all contributed to the creation of one of the most influential computing tools in the world: the Monte Carlo method. First conceived in 1946 by Stanislaw Ulam at Los Alamos† and subsequently developed by John von Neumann, Robert Richtmyer, and Nick Metropolis, the method was first used to calculate neutron diffusion paths for the hydrogen bomb. Since then, its use has exploded into an uncountable number of applications in science and technology, artificial intelligence, finance, transport, health, and manufacturing, along with virtually every profession that must measure risks.

The method is particularly useful for modeling situations with a large number of random variables, for instance, in applications ranging from predicting stock market volatility to modeling the post-detonation nuclear forensics of an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) attack. Modern Monte Carlo codes also underpin the criticality calculations in the article Calculating Criticality. The original calculations are historically significant as the first programs written in the modern stored-program paradigm to be run on an electronic computer, now the cornerstone of modern computing.

The virtuoso 

Like many European intellectuals of the time, the Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam emigrated to the US in 1939 to escape racial persecution from the Nazis. Ulam resented being labeled an intellectual, however. His friend Gian-Carlo Rota said, “He would not even agree to being classified as a mathematician. He referred to the published volume of his scientific papers as ‘a slim collection of poems’.”

Perhaps, as Rota suggests in his reminiscences of Ulam, “virtuoso” would be the best descriptor.

As the war intensified, Ulam began to look beyond his teaching position at the University of Wisconsin for ways he could contribute to the war effort. His first thought was to turn to his friend and fellow Jewish emigre John von Neumann, who he suspected was involved in secret military research. Von Neumann’s uncharacteristic silence on scientific matters spoke volumes to Ulam. His suspicions proved to be correct, and before long Ulam joined the Manhattan Project.

At Los Alamos, Ulam discovered a natural talent for applying his esoteric mathematical skills to solve problems in physics. The divide he was attempting to bridge was real—he would joke that “the mathematicians know a great deal about very little and the physicists very little about a great deal.” After watching Enrico Fermi and Richard Feynman at the blackboard, he was inspired to emulate their approach by solving real-world problems with the minimum amount of math. Ulam went on to make major contributions to the design of the hydrogen bomb, solving the problem of how to initiate fusion, although he clashed with its other main designer, Edward Teller.

https://cdn.lanl.gov/244a4ea3-c831-4322-853e-2bb2d4b24b02.png 
https://cdn.lanl.gov/244a4ea3-c831-4322-853e-2bb2d4b24b02.png 

Figure 1. Top left: Stanislaw Ulam. Top right: John von Neumann. Bottom: John von Neumann, Richard Feynman, and Stanislaw Ulam on the porch of Bandelier Lodge near Los Alamos during a picnic, circa 1949. Von Neumann always wore a suit regardless of occasion!
Courtesy: Charles A. Lehman Photography, Los Alamos Photographic Laboratory, AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Physics Today Collection.
“I am thinking about something much more important than bombs; I am thinking about computers.” — John von Neumann, 1945.
Misfortune in the cards 

After the war, Ulam had found himself in a pedestrian teaching job in California when he abruptly began to experience discombobulating headaches. He said that he “remembered suddenly Plato’s description of Socrates after he was given the hemlock in prison; the jailor made him walk and told him that when the feeling of numbness starting in the legs reached his head he would die.”

Within 24 hours he was rushed to face the surgeon’s knife for emergency brain surgery. He lost the ability to speak during the crisis and became desperately concerned about the state of his mental faculties—his whole career rested on the delicate machinery of his grey matter. Nevertheless, during his convalescence he made one of the most consequential intellectual breakthroughs of his life.
